---
title: ISSYP
author: Kieran
layout: post
icon: fa-chalkboard
---

In July, I was the only British attendee of the International Summer School for Young Physicists at the Perimeter Institute in Canada. I was one of 40 International students studying advanced Physics concepts, such as Special Relativity, with lectures from renowned researchers in various fields of Theoretical Physics. Specifically, my mentorship group focused on Quantum Computing, including the Grover Search algorithm and Shor Code, culminating in a group presentation on the topic. One highlight was the visit to SNOLAB, where we were guided through the experiments in their subterranean clean room.

Read the full diary below:

Day 1



This year, I was very fortunate to attend ISSYP 2017, the official physics summer school run by the Perimeter Institute for Theoretical Physics in Waterloo, Ontario. So far, this place had been a distant setting for awesome public lectures and Horizon episodes, so I never really believed I would be accepted. On receiving my acceptance email, I was struck with immediate joy and shock, and began counting down the days until the fortnight began.

The five hour flight to Toronto was tiring, but bearable due to my excitement and the calming voices of Neil DeGrasse Tyson (Star Talk Podcast) and Brian Cox (The Infinite Monkey Cage). After receiving confused looks in security (they must not often see lone 17 year olds claiming to be studying physics half way across the world), I was thrilled to see the happy faces of Erin the chaperone and my co-attendee, Roberto. The one hour bus ride to Waterloo passed quickly as Roberto and I discussed our specific physics interests, the school systems of USA and the UK, and life at university with a MIT student sharing the bus with us.

We entered the common room to meet 6 other teenagers sitting in a circle playing cards. After introducing myself to them all and shaking their hands, we began to discuss our favourite anecdotes of physics history over a game of Canadian Pictionary. As more people arrived, discussions oscillated from black holes and Cosmology, to football, to the contrast between science and art, as every new arrival was welcomed with warmth and interest in their country of origin.

Later on, when everybody had arrived, we were given a tour around the campus of Wilfrid Laurier University, our sleeping quarters for the next two weeks, before we received a brief glimpse of the fabled Perimeter Institute, with its shining glass face reflecting the surrounding moat.

Finally, we were given a brief introduction to the schedule for the following day, before chatting about university systems in different countries as we gradually fell asleep.



Day 2



The early waking tradition of ISSYP began with earnest at 6:00 am on the second day. We ate a fruity breakfast in the Wilfrid Laurier dining area near our accommodation, before venturing out to the park to partake in some introductory activities that allowed us all to introduce ourselves and our interests, and led to everybody learning the majority of the names.

At 12, for the first time, we entered the Perimeter Institute. All jaws were trailing the floor as we were given a tour, passing football pitches of blackboards in communal areas that were adorned with partial differential equations and the like. Even the outside areas had blackboards, as well as shining pools of water with fountains. All the staff walked around freely in the central area, discussing their respective fields of research completely openly. We had lunch in the 2nd Floor Bistro, on a table overlooking a lovely green view outside and a large blackboard inside, which bore numerous snaking equations filled with Greek graphemes. We eagerly discussed the possible meaning of the equations over lunch.

The first lecture began at 1:30. We were introduced to Kelly Foyle and Kevin Donkers, our physics guides for the general lectures of the summer school. The room was organised into 10 tables of 4 students, all eagerly anticipating the start of the lecture. It began with the familiar, refreshing our memories of the properties of waves and particles. The speed of the teaching was enthralling, much faster than normal school lessons, but still completely understandable with plenty of time for deeper discussion and questions, of which there were many, as students jostled to raise topics they’d previously read about in popular science books. However, at the great pace, the familiarity of wave-particle duality soon gave way to considering particles in boxes and quantum dots.

We ended the day with a game of football in the park, before completing the post-lecture review sheets and going to bed.



Day 3



In the morning, we were divided into different teams named after famous scientists (my team was team Dirac). Our aim was to accumulate as many points as possible by bthe end of the camp, and so win the ‘Olymp-Higgs’. Points were available for various good deeds, but also for successfully, and quickly, completing the daily riddles in the morning. These varied in complexity, but all required novel thinking and strange methods, thus requiring teamwork to come up with the correct answer. The best riddles were the ones that gripped you all day, during every break of every lecture, until the answer suddenly appeared in a moment of triumph.

The first lecture of the day continued building on the quantum mechanics lecture from the previous day. We began to detour from the rigorous mathematical route, discussing concepts such as the infinite well potential and the Schrödinger Equation conceptually to allow us to cover as many concepts as possible without the derivative of the rate of teaching becoming negative due to ventures into calculus. Unfortunately, due to time constraints, we only had a glimpse of the Schrödinger Equation and its time-independent solutions.

This lecture was followed by an interesting keynote by Rob Spekkens on Causation and Correlation. We were introduced to the nature of causal models and problems such as Simpson’s Paradox. This led to a discussion of the principles of causal theory, and Bell’s Theorem.

At lunch, we were given the chance to have a walk around Waterloo. Typically, we proceeded to cram into the bookshop’s science section and discuss the popular science books on offer, as the cashier stared questioningly at the crowd of teenagers admiring a small corner of the shop. Afterwards, all the international students went to the supermarket to buy maple syrup products, as the Canadian group looked on in disgust at the ‘Tourists’.

The post-lunch lectures began with a brief look at complex standing waves and the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle, before departing from Quantum Mechanics and entering the realm of Special Relativity. Lectures here were more mathematical, as we built on Galilean Relativity to discuss Einstein’s motivations to develop the theory and the basics of time dilation and length contraction.

At dinner, we all ate quickly before venturing outside to gawp at the adding of dry ice from a cloud chamber model to water. We then went bowling, and concluded the day with the reflect questions from the lectures.



Day 4



The Special Relativity lectures continued, as we began to discuss effective inertia changes, as well as delving into Lorentz Transformations and the Twins Paradox. We went significantly further into the mathematics of Special Relativity than of Quantum Mechanics, reflecting the fact that we had not yet covered much of the maths required for Quantum Mechanics in school.

The lecture was followed by a discussion focusing on the science undertaken at SNOLAB. We looked at the processes of neutrino detection and the Solar Neutrino Problem solved at SNOLAB, before looking at some of the different detectors individually.

On arriving at the residence, we packed for our trip to SNOLAB, before heading off for astronomy night. This began with a presentation at the residence by the Royal Astronomical Society concerning the activities undertaken by the society, as well as the different sights that can be seen with inexpensive telescopes and low light pollution.

The bus ride to the viewing sight was fortunately short, but the view of the sky granted to us by the low light pollution of rural Canada was worth any bus ride. We began with an introduction, before we went from telescope to telescope, amazed at the objects they framed, and quizzing their owners about their sky-viewing habits. The objects we looked at included the M81 and M82 galaxies, Jupiter and Saturn, the Cigar Nebula and an Iridium Flare (an old telecommunications satellite reflecting the Sun with its solar panels). The society was incredibly generous in granting us the opportunity to use their equipment, and we left overjoyed, with plans to buy our own telescopes.



Day 5



Day 5 began with a lecture discussing the Cosmic Microwave Background. We analysed power spectra and the Fourier transform using music editing software, allowing us to gain an insight into how the CMB data is analysed and interpreted to give the composition of the early universe.

We then received a keynote from Kendrick Smith concerning the CHIME experiment. CHIME uses delay software, instead of huge parabolic dishes, to focus on specific points in space. This potentially allows it to analyse many separate beams and produce a much more detailed image of the sky than previous radio telescopes. This keynote was very interesting, as it meandered from CHIME to Fast Radio Bursts, Pulsars and Gravitational Waves.

The rest of the day was spent on a bus to SNOLAB. The 5 hour drive was very tedious, but we had many interesting conversations to fill the time. Our arrival at Sudbury was met with a buffet meal and a welcome sleep.



Day 6



We woke early to catch the bus to SNOLAB, quickly emerging from drowsiness as we entered the novel environment of a working mine. To begin, we stayed above ground to learn about the lab, while the first group descended into the mine. We received a lecture discussing the history of SNOLAB, as well as the importance of its discoveries including the uses of neutrinos, the solving of the solar neutrino problem and investigations into dark matter.

The next activity involved using specialist software to sort data from the SNO experiment. This involved reading multiple graphs and rotating a virtual 3D spherical model of the detector to see whether the first PMTs triggered were external (indicating cosmic rays) or internal with a specific circular pattern (indicating a neutrino event). Suddenly, the room erupted into shocked silence as Arthur B. McDonald’s Nobel Prize was unveiled for us to examine excitedly, as queues formed to hold the prize in its protective enclosure.

A hand signal from the staff indicated it was time for us to descend, a job that had to be completed quickly due to the requirement that the mine continued daily operation. We suited up into bulky mining gear and shuffled briskly to the lift, a dark metal cage that plummeted down the shaft. The journey seemed to last forever, before we finally arrived at the correct level, 2km underground. We walked through a labyrinth of paths for another 2km, before reaching the lab.

SNOLAB is a class 2000 clean room, so we had to fully change clothes and shower before we were allowed to enter, clad in blue coveralls and hair nets. On entering, we were divided into groups to tour the lab with a working physicist, receiving detailed descriptions of each experiment with a friendly bias towards the specific experiment that the tour guide worked on. The experiments we saw included SNO+, PICO, HALO and MINICLEAN, among others.

One of the most amazing things about SNOLAB is the workers’ dedication to its cleanliness. Every piece of apparatus, including every nut and bolt, is cleaned thoroughly to remove dust particles before it enters the lab, ensuring that the whole facility is clean enough for the sensitive experiments to work.

At the end of the tour, we left the same way we came in. After a brief visit to the gift shop, we boarded the bus home.



Day 7



The weekend began with an opportunity to sleep in. However, the opportunity was rejected by the majority of the group, with excursions to the nearby cricket pitch to play football and frisbee.

After breakfast, the ‘experimentation day’ began. This involved splitting us into groups of four that rotated about a circuit of different experiment tables. The experiments completed reflected some of the previous theoretical work from earlier in the week, including quantum physics (electron diffraction, measuring the Planck constant with LEDs, measuring he photoelectric effect with LEDs and looking at the spectral lines of various elements), waves (standing waves of a square plate and ring) and special relativity (measuring the speed of light with margarine in a microwave).

The day concluded with a poster-making session for the ‘olymp-Higgs’. As team Dirac, we produced a  masterpiece with chalk, pencils and fluffy spheres, demonstrating Dirac’s research into positrons and magnetic monopoles.

Before bed, we were visited by three PI researchers to reflect on our work for the week and assist with any problems or questions we had. The opportunity to discuss complex ideas with masters of their fields was brilliant, and many stayed up as late as possible to grill the guests on their careers.



Day 8



Lectures resumed with general relativity. This began with a discussion of acceleration in special relativity, before we moved on to the precession of the perihelion of Mercury. Analogies with rotating cylinders led to a discussion of acceleration without apparent motion. The lecture concluded hastily as we boarded the bus to Niagara.

The Niagara Falls were incredible. The sheer volume of water cascading down created clouds of mist surrounding them like a cloak, making them more visible from afar than close up. We were given the opportunity to experience the falls from directly below in the Hornblower, an opportunity that resulted in being completely drenched in water. The trip concluded with a meal at the summit of the Skylon tower with a full view of the falls.

We returned to Waterloo cold and tired, and eager for sleep.





Day 9



The trips continued on day with a morning tour of the Institute for Quantum Computing. The tour began with a lecture on the concept of a qubit and their various uses for communication and processing. While one group began experimenting, we received a lab tour of the facility, seeing equipment used to simulate atoms with nano-circuitry and a clean room of class 100 with its own separate foundations. The groups then swapped, and we played with superconductors and magnets with liquid nitrogen.

This was the first day of mentoring, where we received small group classes with researchers in various specific fields I chose the quantum computing group, where we began with an introduction to Bra-Ket notation and qubits on the Bloch sphere, before different operations were discussed.

The day concluded with a game of laser quest, leaving us very tired.



Day 10



Morning lectures resumed with a discussion of time in different gravitational field strengths. An introduction to relativistic redshift and gravitational lensing was then followed by a short overview of inflation and the Schwartzchild radius.

This was followed by an eagerly anticipated question and answer session with a physicist, a postgraduate student and a PhD student. We grilled the guests on various topics ranging from their working life and the process of publishing papers to their hobbies and whether or not they read XKCD, rushing to scribble down all their answers in the hope that they contained wisdom pertinent to the future.

After the break, the second day of mentoring began. We commenced by expanding our previous work with 2 qubits, before discussing the no-cloning theorem and entanglement. The mentoring was my favourite part of the fortnight, since it felt like we could steer the course of the discussion with our questions and still maintain a pace much faster than the usual school pace.

At dinner, we sat around the table with the cosmology mentor, , who presented us with interesting anecdotes from his career and challenging riddles to ponder as we ate.

The day concluded with the culmination of the ‘Olymp-Higgs’ event, consisting of a series of aptly-named challenges in which members from each team competed for points. This was followed by a cinema session in the auditorium, where we watched ‘Arrival’.



Day 11



The day began with a thought experiment concerning the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle. We discussed the Planck units and the Casimir effect, before we entered the lecture theatre for a keynote by Sumati Suryan on light cones and causality.

Mentoring continued as we began to analyse quantum algorithms such as the Deutch-Josza algorithm and Grover Search. It was incredibly interesting to apply the rules we’d previously learned to real ideas in quantum computing,  giving us all a true sense of achievement.

The day concluded with a planning session for the presentation on our mentoring topics. We separated the topics we’d learned into groups for each person to talk about, before preparing poster sections for each group of topics and writing out our talks.



Day 12



The penultimate morning lecture focused on black holes and Hawking radiation, and we used some of the previous lectures’ discussions to explain Hawking radiation and the Information Paradox.

The final keynote was presented by the Director of the Perimeter Institute, Neil Turok. He discussed Cosmology and interconnectedness in the universe, detailing his investigations into Cosmology and his personal beliefs concerning parallel universes.

Mentoring concluded with a look at Shor Code and the generalisation of Grover Search, rounding off our foray into Quantum Computing and leaving us all eager to learn more. We used the notes from these sessions to further prepare our presentations for the next day, rehearsing the speeches and trimming them down according to the time allocated.



Day 13



The morning lecture was slower and had a reflective feeling. We discussed the problems concerning the event horizons and singularities of black holes, before concluding with an overview of the topics we’d discussed over all lectures.

We then presented our mentoring topics in the lecture theatre, to an assembled audience of the other students, previous lecturers and keynote speakers and our mentors. The excitement of each group about their mentoring topic was evident, as we desperately condensed the week’s work into five minutes. Personally, I discussed Shor Code with reference to the standard use of repetition code in classical computing.

The presentation was followed by a poster session in the atrium. It was incredibly interesting to discuss the ideas we’d just learned with physicists who were currently researching those ideas.

Our final time in the Perimeter Institute was spent in the auditorium with a final presentation. We received signed copies of Neil Turok’s ‘The Universe Within’, as well as certificates, and sat and laughed at the displayed picture montage.



